This is a future project.

Below are internal notes that .... well if you want to read them go right ahead. I want to journal the concept so that when I am ready to build it I can see the architecture.


talked with Gemini and Copilot to quickly get ideas transcribed. Asked for summary. Below


Slide Flick is a frame-by-frame custom animation engine built purely in VBA for Microsoft PowerPoint. It bypasses native PowerPoint animations, driving complex layout transformations on a single slide using a high-performance timeline architecture.Target Frame Rate: Up to 24 FPS.Target Scale: Seamlessly manages up to 500+ shapes across 720+ frames (30-second sequences).Cross-Platform: Native compatibility with Windows PC and macOS.🏗️ Core Architecture & Data PipelineTo maximize performance within VBA's single-threaded environment, Slide Flick uses a Sparse Keyframe Registry Pattern. Instead of polling every shape or checking monolithic arrays on every frame tick, the engine isolates data tracking at both the Property level and the Shape level.1. Global Shape Registries (The Property Filters)To prevent redundant iterations, shapes are registered only into the specific property pipelines they utilize. A single shape can live in multiple registries if it uses multiple properties.movingShapes (Collection): Only contains Shape IDs that actively change Left, Top, or Rotation.scalingShapes (Collection): Only contains Shape IDs that actively change Width or Height (used for squash/stretch or simulating a Z-axis).switchingShapes (Collection): Only contains Shape IDs tied to visibility toggles (e.g., character blinks or Switch Board phoneme mouth shapes).2. Timeline Object Model (clsAnimatedShape)Every animated shape is backed by an instance of a class module (clsAnimatedShape). Timeline data is stored in native VBA collections using string-based frame keys (e.g., "F1", "F45") to achieve instant O(1) memory lookups during scrubbing.vba' --- clsAnimatedShape Class Attributes ---
Public ShapeID As Long
Public PositionTimeline As Collection   ' Keys: "F1", "F2"... Values: Array(Left, Top, Rotation)
Public ScaleTimeline As Collection      ' Keys: "F1", "F2"... Values: Array(Width, Height)
Public VisibilityTimeline As Collection ' Keys: "F1", "F2"... Values: Boolean
Use code with caution.3. Data PersistenceStorage Mechanism: Serialization via an explicit XML schema.Implementation: Data is compiled into a single XML block and safely embedded directly into the presentation file using native CustomXMLParts. This ensures the animation data persists, transfers, and saves seamlessly with the .pptx file.⚡ Playback & Scrubbing OptimizationScrubbing (Editing Mode): When a user drags the timeline indicator to a specific frame (e.g., jumping from Frame 5 to Frame 3), the engine queries the master shape registries, checks the exact string key for that frame, and updates the canvas instantly.Playback (Presentation Mode): Execution relies on listening to slideshow transition events and calling SlideShowView.GotoSlide.No Multi-Data Blending: If a shape has no entry for a specific frame key, the engine uses On Error Resume Next to safely skip it instantly, wasting zero CPU cycles on un-animated shapes.🍏 Cross-Platform Workarounds (Mac Compatibility)Because Slide Flick runs purely in VBA, it completely avoids Windows-only dependencies like Scripting.Dictionary or Win32 API calls (QueryPerformanceCounter/Sleep).1. The Sandbox File IO Export WorkaroundMac App Sandboxing blocks standard sequential file writing (like exporting several hundred frames to a folder via Shape.Export), triggering endless "Grant Permission" prompts or Error 70.The Slide Flick Solution: When exporting an image sequence on macOS, Slide Flick automatically duplicates the active slide, builds a temporary 720-slide sequential presentation, and pauses to prompt the user to use PowerPoint's native, sandboxed menu path: File > Export > Save as Image Sequence. The temporary file is discarded immediately afterward.2. Copy/Paste Stability & The Zero FrameID Isolation: The engine tracks shapes strictly by their unique PowerPoint IDs. Copy-pasting (CTRL+C / CTRL+V) or duplicating a shape intentionally strips previous animation data.Initialization: When a new shape is recorded for the first time, it is initialized with a Zero Frame data point mapping its baseline properties. Users can override this zero-frame baseline via a dedicated UI button (e.g., starting an asset off-canvas).🚀 Next Phase Implementation Goals (In 2 Months)The Switch Board Feature: System for handling character rigging visibility trees (swapping grouped child components like mouths and eyes cleanly via IDs).Interpolation Engine: Establishing the mathematical tracking for tweening between isolated keyframes during playback.


I need to ensure I have the architecture down.

Slide Flick will contain
* Frame by Frame Engine
* Switch Group Panel
* Pose Library Panel
* Setup


<------------------------------Frame by Frame Engine:------------------------------------->
 The FBF portion of Slide Flick focuses on recording shape properties per frame. This is stored in customxmlparts but during runtime it is stored in a quickly read object collection
To best understand FBF for future me I will write out the collections and properties I plan to hold and then the process for a New Scene, Record a Frame, Add new Shape, Scrubbing, and Playback

Collections and Properties:
* Used Shape Collection (Position): holds all IDs of shapes that have had one or more animations. We are keeping them separate because we should not try to add additional updates that are not needed.
* Used Shape Collection (Scale): Holds all IDS of shapes that had at least one scale change. All scale change shape IDs will automatically be added to the used shapes position collection because translation happens when scale happens.
* Used Shape Collection (Visibility): Holds all shapes that had any kind of visibility change. this is separate because most shapes that experience visibility will not typically change position or scale apart from a group carrying them.
* Frame Data Collection (Position). Contains all frames for an animation. Each value is nothing but a delimited list of shape IDs that have movements of top, left or rotation.
* Frame Data Collection (Scale). This gets separated because 


New Scene:
All shapes are looked at including 

slide Flick is a frame by frame engine. While there may be interpolation after that is not at all what I am desiging as the core. 
Now if 500 shapes were all moving at once then probably a group or something would be better but we need need to be ready for what I will throw at it. It is correct that 500 shapes will NOT be animated all 720 frames. but a lot will. and if the animation is longer I need to be ready to handle those 20 million characters. If objects can hold it in memory then I am on board. but if we are going to bloat memory by doing this when the shape already has most of the properties and can hold additional ones with tags. I would like us to be cautious of that. I really do like the idea of everything being an object but I dont want to spend the time to make something that takes 4GB of memory when running.


---------------

 I have to conceptualize it.
I need to start small. So
We used to hold zero frame data in EVERY shape on the slide when a new scene is created. We are proposing that we NO LONGER use tags. We dont need to. everything can be live objects and xmlparts.
This is appealing but.
There can be several scenes per presentation. so we just have to make sure that the 50 million worse case we mentioned. Might have to put into something like 50 slides. 50 scenes is a lot but that is now for a worse case scenario 
whatever number this is 2,500,000,000 is that 2 billion 500 million?

this is not what is in memory this is what might be in the xml parts. The reason this is important is because we have to store all the data we need in this xml so it can be read, loaded to objects, and then resaved.

Are we going to run into problems early on?

-------------------

there are 2 edge cases that will push this limit.
1: Me. I will push that limit but I know I can just make another presentation and continue where I left off.
2: the inexperienced animator / powerpoint user. example . They animate a character walking. They move the "background" that has 200 shapes. Each shape is recorded for every frame. They should have grouped the shapes behind the character then moved that group along with the shapes in front of the character to create the overlap. Inexperienced people will not understand this and may indeed cause the "program" to run sluggish. 

I see that being the main case here. As the slide flick community is built, best practices will be discussed and honestly the group might be really small. If I am being honest. This add-in is for me. I know how it works. I have a 2003 version that uses nothing but tags. I want to make it work with a newer version so the objects make sense. 

The users who pick this up will probably understand that we need to be kind to it to get it to work. Its a niche tool that is for people who like to draw stuff in PowerPoint and now want to animate it frame by frame. Yeah that audience is small. 
I think we will be ok and I dont think my comp will blow up using this. 
As long as what we do does not generate more file size than tags themselves would have done I think we will be fine.

-------------------

ok before we do that. there is something I want that I am wondering if its now easier. I need to be able to scrub the timeline. to do that. I need to know where every shape is supposed to go on every frame. Now let me put this in context. If have one shape that moves on frame 2 and I go to frame 720 and then move it. I need frame 719 to say the coordinates of frame 2. now while we could make lookup collections and such. I really just want to know exactly where every shape is at all times. can it be done at least in the object? then written in xml normally?

--------------------

I think I would run into a problem. Lets say frame 10 has movement and no other movenment until frame 20
so I go back to frame 10 and make a new movement. 11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 all update now?
I guess its a "scrub" property in the object not the playback one right?
So on record frame. We look at playback property and then identify the 1st and last frames to add these scrub values?
I think that's correct but it's lots of info being saved right? Can it handle it?



-----------------
BREAKTHROUGH!
I could take a character. tween them across the screen for a walk out of frame scene. and then as they are moving take 4 frames to move them up and down to make a "bounce" for the walk. then when it plays back it sees a tween. the tween is applied but on frames where there is raw data it uses that one instead..... this is.. woah
that if for a tween type


----------------

Ok I am following. so here is a real concept that I didnt even think about.
we were talking about singles earlier right? but. each shape needs to have the 
scrub playback coordinates
the realtime playback coordinates
the tween coordinates
and a few other things

These coordinates are arrays. so are we saying that I actually store arrays as the type of singles for all these properties? I then redim the array size if the user adds an extra frame? Is it that easy?

Im on frame 10 
shape.realtimeLeft(9) = 1.25
shape.realTimeTop(9) = 0

is that it? and it updates the object each time?


EAch shape gets an object that holds this
A shape can absolutely hold multiple arrays of Singles, each representing a different “track” of motion:
* ScrubTrack — the authoritative, baked frame‑by‑frame data
* RealTimeTrack — the values used during playback (may include tween overrides)
* TweenTrack — start/end/easing metadata
* PreviewTrack — optional, for live preview without committing
* LastRecordedTrack — optional, for fill‑forward logic

ReDim Preserve them when the user adds more frames.
“Im on frame 10
shape.realtimeLeft(9) = 1.25
shape.realTimeTop(9) = 0
is that it?”

Yes. That’s literally it.
